Upgrading to Airflow 2.0 doc (#12930)
mistercrunch/Airflow: docs/apache-airflow/upgrading-to-2.rst

.. Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
   or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
   distributed with this work for additional information
   regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
   to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
   "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
   with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

..   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

.. Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
   software distributed under the License is distributed on an
   "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
   KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
   specific language governing permissions and limitations
   under the License.

Upgrading to Airflow 2.0+
-------------------------

.. contents:: :local:

Apache Airflow 2.0 is a major release and the purpose of this document is to assist
users to migrate from Airflow 1.10.x to Airflow 2.0.

Step 1: Upgrade to Python 3
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Airflow 1.10 will be the last release series to support Python 2. Airflow 2.0.0 will require Python 3.6+.

> If you have a specific task that still requires Python 2 then you can use the PythonVirtualenvOperator for this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have a specific task that still requires Python 2 then you can use the :class:`~airflow.operators.python.PythonVirtualenvOperator` for this.
```

> If you have a specific task that still requires Python 2 then you can use the PythonVirtualenvOperator for this.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you have a specific task that still requires Python 2 then you can use the PythonVirtualenvOperator or the KubernetesPodOperator for this.
```

For a list of breaking changes between Python 2 and Python 3, please refer to this
[handy blog](https://blog.couchbase.com/tips-and-tricks-for-upgrading-from-python-2-to-python-3/)
from the CouchBaseDB team.

Step 2: Upgrade to Airflow 1.10.14 (a.k.a our "bridge" release)
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

To minimize friction for users upgrading from Airflow 1.10 to Airflow 2.0 and beyond, a "bridge"

> release and final 1.10 version will be made available. Airflow 1.10.14 includes support for various critical features

Reviewer: We need to convey something along the lines of what we mention in https://github.com/apache/airflow/blob/master/UPGRADING_TO_2.0.md#support-for-airflow-110x-releases

Author: Good catch. I missed that, will add it.

Author: Actually, it is here, but in the tail end of the document. Do you want me to move it up?

Author: I pulled up some of the content from later on to address your feedback that it should be earlier. Does this work?

> that make it easy for users to test DAGs and make sure they are as compatible with Airflow 2.0, so that the . We strongly recommend that all users upgrading to Airflow 2.0 first

Reviewer 3: Not finiished sentence.

Author: Thanks @potiuk will fix.

upgrade to Airflow 1.10.14 is straight forward.

Features in 1.10.14 include:

1. Most breaking DAG and architecture changes of Airflow 2.0 have been backported to Airflow 1.10.14. This backward-compatibility does not mean

> that 1.10.14 will process these DAGs the same way as Airflow 2.0. What this does mean is that most Airflow 2.0

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
that 1.10.14 will process these DAGs the same way as Airflow 2.0. Instead, this means that most Airflow 2.0
```

compatible DAGs will work in Airflow 1.10.14. This backport will give users time to modify their DAGs over time
without any service disruption.

2. We have also backported the updated Airflow 2.0 CLI commands to Airflow 1.10.4, so that users can modify their scripts
to be compatible with Airflow 2.0 before the upgrade.

3. For users of the KubernetesExecutor, we have backported the ``pod_template_file`` capability for the KubernetesExecutor
as well as a script that will generate a ``pod_template_file`` based on your ``airflow.cfg`` settings. To generate this file
simply run the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

     airflow generate_pod_template -o <output file path>

> Once you have performed this step, simply write out the file path to this file in the ``pod_template_file`` section of the ``kubernetes``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have performed this step, simply write out the file path to this file in the ``pod_template_file`` config of the ``kubernetes``
```

section of your ``airflow.cfg``

Step 3: Install and run the Upgrade check scripts
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

> After upgrading to Airflow 1.10.14, we recommend that you install the "upgrade check" scripts. These scripts will read through your ``airflow.cfg`` and all of your Dags and will give a detailed report of all changes required before upgrading. We are testing this script diligently, and our goal is that any Airflow setup that can pass these tests will be able to upgrade to 2.0 without any issues.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
After upgrading to Airflow 1.10.14, we recommend that you install the "upgrade check" scripts. These scripts will read through your ``airflow.cfg`` and all of your DAGs and will give a detailed report of all changes required before upgrading. We are testing this script diligently, and our goal is that any Airflow setup that can pass these tests will be able to upgrade to 2.0 without any issues.
```

.. code-block:: bash

     pip install apache-airflow-upgrade-check

Once this is installed, please run the upgrade check script.

.. code-block:: bash

     airflow upgrade_check

More details about this process are here  :ref:`Upgrade Check Scripts<upgrade-check:upgrade_check>`

> Step 4: Set Operators to Backport Providers

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Step 4: Import Operators from Backport Providers
```

'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

> Now that you are set up in airflow 1.10.14 with python a 3.6+ environment, you are ready to start porting your DAGs to Airfow 2.0 compliance!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you are set up in Airflow 1.10.14 with Python a 3.6+ environment, you are ready to start porting your DAGs to Airflow 2.0 compliance!
```

The most important step in this transition is also the easiest step to do in pieces. All Airflow 2.0 operators are backwards compatible with Airflow 1.10

> using the [backport providers](./backport-providers.rst) service. In your own time, you can transition to using these backport-providers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
using the [backport providers](./backport-providers.rst) packages. In your own time, you can transition to using these backport-providers
```

> using the [backport providers](./backport-providers.rst) packages. In your own time, you can transition to using these backport-providers

Reviewer 4: Markdown link syntax left over here.

by pip installing the provider via ``pypi`` and changing the import path.

For example: While historically you might have imported the DockerOperator in this fashion:

.. code-block:: python

    from airflow.operators.docker_operator import DockerOperator

> You would now run this command to import the provider:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You would now run this command to install the provider:
```

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install apache-airflow-backport-providers-docker

and then import the operator with this path:

.. code-block:: python

    from airflow.providers.docker.operators.docker import DockerOperator

Pleaes note that the backport provider packages are just backports of the provider packages compatible with Airflow 2.0.

> Those provider packages are installed automatically when you install airflow with extras.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In Apache Airflow 2.0+, those provider packages are installed automatically when you install Airflow with extras.
Several of the providers (http, ftp, sqlite, imap) are installed automatically when you install Airflow even without extras.
```

> Those provider packages are installed automatically when you install airflow with extras.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Those provider packages are installed automatically when you install Airflow with extras.
```

For example:

.. code-block:: bash

>     pip install airflow[docker]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    pip install 'apache-airflow[docker]'
```

> automatically installs the ``apache-airflow-providers-docker`` package.

Reviewer 4: This install provider via extra only applies to Airflow 2, which isn't clear (to me) from this section.

> But you can manage/upgrade remove provider packages separately from the airflow core.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But you can manage/upgrade/remove provider packages separately from the Airflow core.
```

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can read more about providers at :doc:`apache-airflow-providers:index`.
```

Step 5: Upgrade Airflow DAGs
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

**Change to undefined variable handling in templates**

Prior to Airflow 2.0 Jinja Templates would permit the use of undefined variables. They would render as an
empty string, with no indication to the user an undefined variable was used. With this release, any template
rendering involving undefined variables will fail the task, as well as displaying an error in the UI when
rendering.

The behavior can be reverted when instantiating a DAG.

.. code-block:: python

    import jinja2

>     dag = DAG('simple_dag', template_undefined=jinja2.Undefined)

Reviewer 4: It is also possible to override it on a case-by-case basis by using the `| default` Jinja filter:

```
'{{ a | default(1) }}'
```

> **Changes to the KubernetesPodOperator**

Reviewer 4: Should these be headings so they show up in the toc?

```suggestion
Changes to the KubernetesPodOperator
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

Reviewer 4: I don't know about this -- it might be a bit too noisy with that.

Author: Yes, I was worried it would get way too noisy, with too many sections. 
I went back and forth on this a bit, can easily changed it to be sub-headings, but ended up keeping it like this for now.

**Change default value for dag_run_conf_overrides_params**

DagRun configuration dictionary will now by default overwrite params dictionary. If you pass some key-value pairs
through ``airflow dags backfill -c`` or ``airflow dags trigger -c``, the key-value pairs will
override the existing ones in params. You can revert this behaviour by setting ``dag_run_conf_overrides_params`` to ``False``
in your ``airflow.cfg``.

**DAG discovery safe mode is now case insensitive**

When ``DAG_DISCOVERY_SAFE_MODE`` is active, Airflow will now filter all files that contain the string ``airflow`` and ``dag``
in a case insensitive mode. This is being changed to better support the new ``@dag`` decorator.

**Change to Permissions**

The DAG-level permission actions, ``can_dag_read`` and ``can_dag_edit`` are going away. They are being replaced with ``can_read`` and ``can_edit``. When a role is given DAG-level access, the resource name (or "view menu", in Flask App-Builder parlance) will now be prefixed with ``DAG:``. So the action ``can_dag_read`` on ``example_dag_id``, is now represented as ``can_read`` on ``DAG:example_dag_id``.

> *As part of running ``db upgrade``, existing permissions will be migrated for you.*

Reviewer 4: XD updated this in a PR just "now" -- could you get the lastest version please.

When DAGs are initialized with the ``access_control`` variable set, any usage of the old permission names will automatically be updated in the database, so this won't be a breaking change. A DeprecationWarning will be raised.

**Drop legacy UI in favor of FAB RBAC UI**

.. warning::
    Breaking change

    Previously we were using two versions of UI, which were hard to maintain as we need to implement/update the same feature
    in both versions. With this release we've removed the older UI in favor of Flask App Builder RBAC UI. No need to set the
    RBAC UI explicitly in the configuration now as this is the only default UI. We did it to avoid
    the huge maintenance burden of two independent user interfaces

Please note that that custom auth backends will need re-writing to target new FAB based UI.

As part of this change, a few configuration items in ``[webserver]`` section are removed and no longer applicable,
including ``authenticate``, ``filter_by_owner``, ``owner_mode``, and ``rbac``.

Before upgrading to this release, we recommend activating the new FAB RBAC UI. For that, you should set
the ``rbac`` options  in ``[webserver]`` in the ``airflow.cfg`` file to ``true``

> .. code-block:: bash

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: ini
```

    [webserver]
    rbac = true

In order to login to the interface, you need to create an administrator account.

.. code-block:: bash

    airflow create_user \
        --role Admin \
        --username admin \
        --firstname FIRST_NAME \
        --lastname LAST_NAME \
        --email EMAIL@example.org

If you have already installed Airflow 2.0, you can create a user with the command ``airflow users create``.
You don't need to make changes to the configuration file as the FAB RBAC UI is
the only supported UI.

> .. code-block:: bash

Reviewer 3: Repeated code block (15 lines above). This one can be removed.

> .. code-block:: bash
> 
>     airflow users create \
>         --role Admin \
>         --username admin \
>         --firstname FIRST_NAME \
>         --lastname LAST_NAME \
>         --email EMAIL@example.org
> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

(Just codifying Jarek's suggestion)

The Old and New provider configuration keys that have changed are as follows

==================== ==================
Old Keys             New keys
==================== ==================
consumer_key         client_id
consumer_secret      client_secret
base_url             api_base_url
request_token_params client_kwargs
==================== ==================

For more information, visit https://flask-appbuilder.readthedocs.io/en/latest/security.html#authentication-oauth

Step 6: Upgrade Configuration settings
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Airflow 2.0 is stricter with respect to expectations on configuration data and requires explicit
specifications of configuration values in more cases rather than defaulting to a generic value.

Some of these are detailed in the Upgrade Check guide, but a significant area of change is with
respect to the Kubernetes Executor. This is called out below for users of the Kubernetes Executor.

**Upgrade KubernetesExecutor settings**

*The KubernetesExecutor Will No Longer Read from the airflow.cfg for Base Pod Configurations.*

In Airflow 2.0, the KubernetesExecutor will require a base pod template written in yaml. This file can exist

> anywhere on the host machine and will be linked using the ``pod_template_file`` configuration in the airflow.cfg.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
anywhere on the host machine and will be linked using the ``pod_template_file`` configuration in the airflow.cfg. You can create a ``pod_template_file`` by running the following command:  ``airflow generate_pod_template`` ```

The ``airflow.cfg`` will still accept values for the ``worker_container_repository``, the ``worker_container_tag``, and
the default namespace.

> The following ``airflow.cfg`` values will be deprecated:
> 
> .. code-block:: bash

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following ``airflow.cfg`` values will be deprecated::
```

This one is not bash -- and no special syntax is appropriate here.

Reviewer 4: (Ending a block with `::` makes the next block a code block iff it is indented.)

                            path="/tmp/"
                        )
                    )
                ]
            )
        )
        }
    )

For Airflow 2.0, the traditional ``executor_config`` will continue operation with a deprecation warning,
but will be removed in a future version.

Step 7: Upgrade to Airflow 2.0
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

After running the upgrade checks as described above, installing the backported providers, modifying
the DAGs to be compatible, and updating the configuration settings, you should be ready to upgrade to Airflow 2.0.

A final run of the upgrade checks is always a good idea to make sure you have missed anything. At
this stage the problems detected should be either be zero or minimal which you plan to fix after
upgrading the Airflow version.

At this point, just follow the standard Airflow version upgrade process:
* Make sure your Airflow meta database is backed up
* Pause all the DAGs and make sure there is nothing actively running
* Upgrade the Airflow version to the 2.0 version of choice
* Upgrade the Airflow meta database using ``airflow db upgrade``. This command is now shown in the Airflow 2.0 CLI syntax.

> * Restart Airflow Scheduler, Webserver, and Workers

Reviewer 4: I think we should explicitly mention something about installing the right providers, either via the extras or selecting the (non backport) providers too.

Possibly have to _uninstall_ the backport providers too if you are upgrading an install in place (i.e. if you are not using Docker where a change to requirements gets a fresh set of modules)

.. note::

    The database upgrade may take a while depending on the number of DAGs in the database and the volume of history
    stored in the database for task history, xcom variables, etc.
    For a faster database upgrade and for better overall performance, it is recommended that you periodically archive
    the old historical elements which are no longer of value.

Appendix
''''''''

> Changed Parameters for the KubernetesPodOperator

Reviewer 4: These headings are at the same level -- they probably shouldn't be.

Author: Changed now to be sub-headings.

        namespace='default',
        image="ubuntu:16.04",
        cmds=["bash", "-cx"],
        arguments=["echo 10"],
        labels={"foo": "bar"},
        name="test-" + str(random.randint(0, 1000000)),
        task_id="task" + self.get_current_task_name(),
        in_cluster=False,
        do_xcom_push=False,
        resources=resources,
    )

**image_pull_secrets has migrated from a String to a List[k8s.V1LocalObjectReference]**

Before:

.. code-block:: python

    k = KubernetesPodOperator(
        namespace='default',
        image="ubuntu:16.04",
        cmds=["bash", "-cx"],
        arguments=["echo 10"],
        name="test",
        task_id="task",
        image_pull_secrets="fake-secret",
        cluster_context='default'
    )

After:

.. code-block:: python

    quay_k8s = KubernetesPodOperator(
        namespace='default',
        image='quay.io/apache/bash',
        image_pull_secrets=[k8s.V1LocalObjectReference('testquay')],
        cmds=["bash", "-cx"],
        name="airflow-private-image-pod",
        task_id="task-two",
    )

Migration Guide from Experimental API to Stable API v1
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

> In Airflow 2.0, we added the new REST API. Experimental API still works, but support may be dropped in the future.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In Airflow 2.0, we added the new REST API. Experimental API still works, but support may be dropped in the future.

The experimental API however does not require authentication, so it is disabled by default. You need to explicitly enable the experimental API if you want to use it.
```

> If your application is still using the experimental API, you should consider migrating to the stable API.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If your application is still using the experimental API, you should **seriously** consider migrating to the stable API.
```

Latest DAG Runs(GET)              /api/experimental/latest_runs                                                    /api/v1/dags/{dag_id}/dagRuns
Get all pools(GET)                /api/experimental/pools                                                          /api/v1/pools
Create a pool(POST)               /api/experimental/pools                                                          /api/v1/pools
Delete a pool(DELETE)             /api/experimental/pools/<string:name>                                            /api/v1/pools/{pool_name}
DAG Lineage(GET)                  /api/experimental/lineage/<DAG_ID>/<string:execution_date>/                      /api/v1/dags/{dag_id}/dagRuns/{dag_run_id}/taskInstances/{task_id}/xcomEntries
================================= ================================================================================ ==============================================================================

::
    This endpoint ``/api/v1/dags/{dag_id}/dagRuns`` also allows you to filter dag_runs with parameters such as ``start_date``, ``end_date``, ``execution_date`` etc in the query string.

>     Therefore the operation previously performed by this endpoint

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Therefore the operation previously performed by this endpoint:
```

    # Creating a flask appbuilder Menu Item
    appbuilder_mitem = {"name": "Google",
                        "category": "Search",
                        "category_icon": "fa-th",
                        "href": "https://www.google.com"}

    # Defining the plugin class
    class AirflowTestPlugin(AirflowPlugin):
        name = "test_plugin"
        appbuilder_views = [v_appbuilder_package]
        appbuilder_menu_items = [appbuilder_mitem]

Changes to extras names
'''''''''''''''''''''''

The ``all`` extra were reduced to include only user-facing dependencies. This means
that this extra does not contain development dependencies. If you were using it and
depending on the development packages then you should use ``devel_all``.

Support for Airflow 1.10.x releases
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

As mentioned earlier in Step 2, the 1.10.14 release is intended to be a "bridge release"
which would be a step in the migration to Airflow 2.0.

After the Airflow 2.0 GA (General Availability) release, it expected that all
future Airflow development would be based on Airflow 2.0, including a series of
patch releases such as 2.0.1, 2.0.2 and then feature releases such as 2.1.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

We plan to follow strict semver approach to our versioning, which means that we do not plan to make any backwards-incompatible changes in 2.* release series. Breaking changes (including deprecated features) will happen in 3.0.0 release. 
```

                                name="example-kubernetes-test-volume"
                            )
                        ]
                    )
                ],
                volumes=[
                    k8s.V1Volume(
                        name="example-kubernetes-test-volume",
                        host_path=k8s.V1HostPathVolumeSource(
                            path="/tmp/"
                        )
                    )
                ]
            )
        )
        }
    )

For Airflow 2.0, the traditional ``executor_config`` will continue operation with a deprecation warning,
but will be removed in a future version.

Step 7: Upgrade to Airflow 2.0
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

After running the upgrade checks as described above, installing the backported providers, modifying
the DAGs to be compatible, and updating the configuration settings, you should be ready to upgrade to Airflow 2.0.

A final run of the upgrade checks is always a good idea to make sure you have missed anything. At
this stage the problems detected should be either be zero or minimal which you plan to fix after
upgrading the Airflow version.

> At this point, just follow the standard Airflow version upgrade process:
> * Make sure your Airflow meta database is backed up

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
At this point, just follow the standard Airflow version upgrade process:

* Make sure your Airflow meta database is backed up
```
